#summary Setup automatic backup

Java class: {{{com.orientechnologies.orient.server.handler.OAutomaticBackup}}}

= Introduction =
Configure an automatic backup of databases. This task is configured as a [DBServer#Handlers Server handler]. The task can be configured in easy way by changing parameters:
 * *enabled*: true to turn on, false (default) is turned off
 * *delay*: delay time. You can use different suffixes to specify different measures:
  * *ms* for milliseconds. Example 10000ms means 10 seconds
  * *s* for seconds. Example 10s means 10 seconds
  * *m* for minutes. Example 5m means 5 minutes
  * *h* for hours. Example 24h means every day
  * *d* for days. Example 1d means every day
 * *target.directory*: target directory, the default is "backup"
 * *target.fileName*: target file name configurable using the following variables between {{{${}}}}:
  * *{{{${DBNAME}}}}*, as the database name
  * *{{{${DATE}}}}*, as the current date following the format. For the complete syntax look at [http://download.oracle.com/javase/1,5.0/docs/api/java/text/SimpleDateFormat.html Java DateTime syntax]
 * *db.include*: database list to include. If empty means all the databases
 * *db.exclude*: database list to exclude

_NOTE: This feature is available since v. 1.0rc6._

Default configuration in orientdb-server-config.xml

{{{
<!-- AUTOMATIC BACKUP, TO TURN ON SET THE 'ENABLED' PARAMETER TO 'true' -->
<handler class="com.orientechnologies.orient.server.handler.OAutomaticBackup">
  <parameters>
    <parameter name="enabled" value="false" />
    <parameter name="delay" value="4h" />
    <parameter name="target.directory" value="backup" />
    <parameter name="target.fileName" value="${DBNAME}-${DATE:yyyyMMddHHmmss}.json" /><!-- ${DBNAME} AND ${DATE:} VARIABLES ARE SUPPORTED -->
    <parameter name="db.include" value="" /><!-- DEFAULT: NO ONE, THAT MEANS ALL DATABASES. USE COMMA TO SEPARATE MULTIPLE DATABASE NAMES -->
    <parameter name="db.exclude" value="" /><!-- USE COMMA TO SEPARATE MULTIPLE DATABASE NAMES -->
  </parameters>
</handler>
}}}