#summary SQL command: ALTER PROPERTY

= Alter Property =

The *SQL Alter Property* command alters a class's property in the schema.

== Syntax ==

{{{
ALTER PROPERTY <class>.<property> <attribute-name> <attribute-value>
}}}

Where:
 * *class* is the class owner of the property to change
 * *property* is the property name to change
 * *attribute-name*, is the attribute name to alter
 * *attribute-value*, is the new attribute value to set

Supported attribute names are:
 * *LINKEDCLASS*, the linked class name. Accepts a string as value
 * *LINKEDTYPE*, the linked type name between those supported: Boolean, Integer, Short, Long, Float, Double, Datetime, String, Binary, Embedded, EmbeddedList, EmbeddedSet, EmbeddedMap, Link, LinkList, LinkSet, LinkMap, Byte, Transient, Date. Accepts a string as value
 * *MIN*, the minimum value as constraint. Accepts strings, numbers or dates as value
 * *MANDATORY*, true if the property is mandatory. Accepts "true" or "false"
 * *MAX*, the maximum value as constraint. Accepts strings, numbers or dates as value
 * *NAME*, the class name. Accepts a string as value
 * *NOTNULL*, the property can't be null. Accepts "true" or "false"
 * *REGEXP* the regular expression as constraint. Accepts a string as value
 * *TYPE*, the type between those supported: Boolean, Integer, Short, Long, Float, Double, Datetime, String, Binary, Embedded, EmbeddedList, EmbeddedSet, EmbeddedMap, Link, LinkList, LinkSet, LinkMap, Byte, Transient, Date. Accepts a string as value
 * *CUSTOM* Set custom properties. Syntax is {{{<name> = <value>}}}. Example: stereotype = icon

== Examples ==

Change the name of the property 'age' in class 'Account' in 'born':

{{{
ALTER PROPERTY Account.age NAME born
}}}

Set a property as mandatory:
{{{
ALTER PROPERTY Account.age MANDATORY true
}}}

Set a custom field on property:
{{{
alter property Foo.bar1 custom stereotype visible
}}}

To create a property use the [SQLCreateProperty Create Property] command, to remove a property use the [SQLRemoveProperty Drop Property] command.

To know more about other SQL commands look at [SQL SQL commands].

This is a command of the Orient console. To know all the commands go to [ConsoleCommands Console commands].