#summary Troubleshooting main page

This page aims to link all the guides to Problems and Troubleshooting.

 * [TroubleshootingJava Troubleshooting Java API]

<wiki:toc max_depth="4" />

==Record id invalid -1:-2==
This message is relative to a temporary [Concepts#RecordID RecordID] generated inside a transaction. For more information look at [Transactions]. This means that the record hasn't been correctly serialized.

==Brand new records are created with version major than 0==
This happens in graphs. Think to this graph of records:

A -> B -> C -> A

When OrientDB starts to serialize records goes recursively from the root A. When A is encountered again to avoid loops it saves the record as empty just to get the RecordID to store into the record C. When the serialization stack ends the record A (that was the first of the stack) is updated because has been created as first but empty.

==Why it's so slow with index and massive insertion?==
Try to enable automatic flush of index nodes. Via API:
{{{
OGlobalConfiguration.MVRBTREE_LAZY_UPDATES.setValue(-1);
}}}
or via configuration:
{{{
java ... -Dmvrbtree.optimizeThreshold=-1 ...
}}}

==Error: com.orientechnologies.orient.core.db.record.ORecordLazySet cannot be cast to com.orientechnologies.orient.core.db.record.OIdentifiable==

This happens if you've migrated a database created with an old version of OrientDB where indexes were managed in different way. Just drop and recreate the indexes.

==com.orientechnologies.common.concur.lock.OLockException: File '/tmp/databases/demo/default.0.oda' is locked by another process, maybe the database is in use by another process. Use the remote mode with a OrientDB server to allow multiple access to the same database==

This is because the database is locked by another process is using it. To fix:
 * check there's no a process is using OrientDB. Most of the times a OrientDB Server is running. Just shutdown it and retry
 * set the [http://code.google.com/p/orient/wiki/PerformanceTuning#Parameters storage.keepOpen] setting to false